fellow citizens: stand here today humbled by the task before, grateful for the trust've bestowed, mindful of the sacrifices borne by ancestors.

 thank President Bush for service to nation -- as well as the generosity and cooperation has shown throughout transition.

Forty-four Americans have taken the presidential oath. The words have been spoken during rising tides of prosperity and the waters of peace. Yet, every so, the oath is taken amidst gathering clouds and raging storms. At moments, America has carried on not because of the skill or vision of in high office, but because, the people, have remained faithful to the ideals of forebears and true to founding documents.

So has been; so must be with generation of Americans.

 are in the midst of crisis is well understood. nation is at war against a far-reaching network of violence and hatred. economy is weakened, a consequence of greed and irresponsibility on the part of, but collective failure to make choices and prepare the nation for a new age. Homes have been lost, jobs shed, businesses shuttered. health care is costly, schools fail -- and day brings evidence the ways use energy strengthen adversaries and threaten planet.

 are the indicators of crisis, subject to data and statistics. measurable, but no profound, is a sapping of confidence across land; a nagging fear America's decline is inevitable, the generation must sights.

Today say to the challenges face are real. are serious and are. will not be met or in a short span of time. But know America: will be met.

On day, gather because have chosen hope over fear, unity of purpose over conflict and discord. On day, come to proclaim an end to the petty grievances and false promises, the recriminations and worn dogmas for far long have strangled politics. remain a young nation. But in the words of Scripture, the time has come to set childish things. The time has come to reaffirm enduring spirit; to choose history; to carry precious gift, noble idea passed on from generation to generation: the God-given promise are equal, are free, and deserve a chance to pursue full measure of happiness.

In reaffirming the greatness of nation understand greatness is never a given. must be earned. journey has never been of short-cuts or settling for. has not been the path for the faint-hearted, for prefer leisure over work, or seek the pleasures of riches and fame. Rather, has been the risk-takers, the doers, the makers of things -- celebrated, but men and women obscure in labor -- have carried up the long rugged path towards prosperity and freedom.

For, packed up worldly possessions and traveled across oceans in search of a new life. For, toiled in sweatshops, and settled the West, endured the lash of the whip, and plowed the earth. For, fought and died in places like Concord and Gettysburg, Normandy and Khe Sahn.

Time and men and women struggled and sacrificed and worked till hands were raw so might live a life. saw America as bigger than the sum of individual ambitions, greater than the differences of birth or wealth or faction.

 is the journey continue today. remain the prosperous, powerful nation on Earth. workers are no productive than when crisis began. minds are no inventive, goods and services no needed than were last week, or last month, or last year. capacity remains undiminished. But time of standing pat, of protecting narrow interests and putting unpleasant decisions -- time has passed. Starting today, must pick up, dust, and begin the work of remaking America.

For look, there is work to be done. The state of economy calls for action, bold and swift. And will act, not to create new jobs, but to lay a new foundation for growth. will build the roads and bridges, the electric grids and digital lines feed commerce and bind.'ll restore science to rightful place, and wield technology's wonders to raise health care's quality and cost. will harness the sun and the winds and the soil to fuel cars and run factories. And will transform schools and colleges and universities to meet the demands of a new age. can do. will do.

, there are question the scale of ambitions, suggest system cannot tolerate big plans. memories are short, for have forgotten country has done, free men and women can achieve when imagination is joined to common purpose, and necessity to courage. the cynics fail to understand is the ground has shifted beneath, the stale political arguments have consumed for so long no longer apply.

The question ask today is not whether government is big or small, but whether works -- whether helps families find jobs at a decent wage, care can afford, a retirement is dignified. Where the answer is yes, intend to move. Where the answer is no, programs will end. And of manage the public's dollars will be held to account, to spend, reform bad habits, and do business in the light of day, because can restore the vital trust between a people and government.

Nor is the question before whether the market is a force for good or ill. power to generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched. But crisis has reminded without a watchful eye, the market can spin of control. The nation cannot prosper long when favors the prosperous. The success of economy has always depended not on the size of gross domestic product, but on the reach of prosperity, on the ability to extend opportunity to every willing heart -- not of charity, but because is the surest route to common good.

As for common defense, reject as false the choice between safety and ideals. Founding Fathers -- (applause) -- Founding Fathers, faced with perils can imagine, drafted a charter to assure the rule of law and the rights of man -- a charter expanded by the blood of generations. ideals light the world, and will not give up for expedience sake.

And so, to the peoples and governments are watching today, from the grandest capitals to the small village where father was born, know America is a friend of nation, and every man, woman and child seeks a future of peace and dignity. And are ready to lead.

Recall earlier generations faced down fascism and communism not with missiles and tanks, but with the sturdy alliances and enduring convictions. understood power cannot protect, nor does entitle to do as please. knew power grows through prudent use; security emanates from the justness of cause, the force of example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.

 are the keepers of legacy. Guided by principles can meet new threats demand even greater effort, even greater cooperation and understanding between nations. will begin to leave Iraq to people and forge a-earned peace in Afghanistan. With old friends and former foes,'ll work to lessen the nuclear threat, and roll the specter of a warming planet.

 will not apologize for way of life, nor will waver in defense. And for seek to advance aims by inducing terror and slaughtering innocents, say to spirit is stronger and cannot be broken -- cannot outlast, and will defeat.

For know patchwork heritage is a strength, not a weakness. are a nation of Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus, and non-believers. are shaped by every language and culture, drawn from every end of Earth; and because have tasted the bitter swill of civil war and segregation, and emerged from dark chapter stronger and united, cannot help but believe the old hatreds shall someday pass; the lines of tribe shall dissolve; as the world grows smaller, common humanity shall reveal; and America must play role in ushering in a new era of peace.

To the Muslim world, seek a new way, based on mutual interest and mutual respect. To leaders the globe seek to sow conflict, or blame society's ills on the West, know people will judge on can build, not destroy.

To cling to power through corruption and deceit and the silencing of dissent, know are on the wrong side of history, but will extend a hand if are willing to unclench fist.

To the people of poor nations, pledge to work alongside to make farms flourish and let clean waters flow; to nourish starved bodies and feed hungry minds. And to nations like enjoy relative plenty, say can no longer afford indifference to the suffering outside borders, nor can consume the world's resources without regard to effect. For the world has changed, and must change with.

As consider the role unfolds before, remember with humble gratitude brave Americans at very hour patrol far deserts and distant mountains. have to tell, as the fallen heroes lie in Arlington whisper through the ages.

 honor not because are the guardians of liberty, but because embody the spirit of service -- a willingness to find meaning in greater than.

And yet at moment, a moment will define a generation, is spirit must inhabit. For as as government can do, and must do, is the faith and determination of the American people upon nation relies. is the kindness to take in a stranger when the levees break, the selflessness of workers would rather cut hours than see a friend lose job sees through darkest hours. is the firefighter's courage to storm a stairway filled with smoke, but a parent's willingness to nurture a child decides fate.

 challenges may be new. The instruments with meet may be new. But values upon success depends -- honesty and work, courage and fair play, tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and patriotism -- things are old. things are true. have been the quiet force of progress throughout history.

 is demanded,, is a return to truths. is required of is a new era of responsibility -- a recognition on the part of every American have duties to, nation and the world; duties do not accept, but rather seize, firm in the knowledge there is so satisfying to the spirit, so defining of character than giving to a difficult task.

 is the price and the promise of citizenship. is the source of confidence -- the knowledge God calls on to shape an uncertain destiny. is the meaning of liberty and creed, why men and women and children of every race and every faith can join in celebration across magnificent mall; and why a man father than  years ago might not have been served in a local restaurant can stand before to take a sacred oath.

So let mark day with remembrance of are and how far have traveled. In the year of America's birth, in the coldest of months, a small band of patriots huddled by dying campfires on the shores of an icy river. The capital was abandoned. The enemy was advancing. The snow was stained with blood. At the moment when the outcome of revolution was in doubt, the father of nation ordered words to be read to the people:

"Let be told to the future world.. in the depth of winter, when but hope and virtue could survive... the city and the country, alarmed at common danger, came to meet ]."

America: In the face of common dangers, in winter of hardship, let remember timeless words. With hope and virtue, let brave the icy currents, and endure storms may come. Let be said by children's children when were tested refused to let journey end, did not turn nor did falter; and with eyes fixed on the horizon and God's grace upon, carried great gift of freedom and delivered to future generations.

Thank. God bless. And God bless the United States of America.
