Chief Justice Roberts, President Carter, President Clinton, President Bush, President Obama, fellow Americans, and people of the world, thank. the citizens of America are joined in a great national effort to rebuild country and restore promise for of people. will determine the course of America, and the world, for, years to come. will face challenges. will confront hardships, but will get the job done.

Every four years, gather on steps to carry the and peaceful transfer of power, and are grateful to President Obama and Lady Michelle Obama for gracious aid throughout transition. have been magnificent. Thank.

Today's ceremony,, has very special meaning, because today are not transferring power from administration to, or from party to, but are transferring power from Washington, D.C., and giving to, the people.

For long, a small group in nation's capital has reaped the rewards of government, while the people have borne the cost. Washington flourished, but the people did not share in wealth. Politicians prospered, but the jobs and the factories closed. The establishment protected, but not the citizens of country. victories have not been victories. triumphs have not been triumphs, and while celebrated in nation's capital, there was to celebrate for struggling families across land. changes, starting here and, because moment is moment --- belongs to. belongs to gathered here today, and watching, across America. is day. is celebration, and, the United States of America, is country.

 matters is not party controls government, but whether government is controlled by the people. January th,  will be remembered as the day the people became the rulers of nation. The forgotten men and women of country, will be forgotten no longer. is listening to. came by the tens of millions to become part of a historic movement, the likes of the world has never seen before. At the center of movement is a crucial conviction, a nation exists to serve citizens. Americans want great schools for children, safe neighborhoods for families, and good jobs for. are and reasonable demands of righteous people and a righteous public, but for of citizens a different reality exists. Mothers and children trapped in poverty in inner cities, rusted factories, scattered like tombstones across the across the landscape of nation, an education system flush with cash, but leaves young and beautiful students deprived of knowledge, and the crime, and the gangs, and the drugs have stolen lives and robbed country of so unrealized potential. American carnage stops here and stops.

 are nation and pain is pain. dreams are dreams and success will be success. share heart, home, and glorious destiny. The oath of office, take today, is an oath of allegiance to Americans. For decades,'ve enriched foreign industry at the expense of American industry, subsidized the armies of countries, while allowing for the very sad depletion of military.'ve defended nation's borders while refusing to defend own. And spent trillions and trillions of dollars overseas, while America's infrastructure has fallen into disrepair and decay.'ve made countries rich while the wealth, strength and confidence of country has dissipated over the horizon. by, the factories shuddered and shores, with not even a thought the millions and millions of American workers were behind. The wealth of middle class has been ripped from homes and redistributed across the world.

But is the, and are looking to the future. assembled here today issuing a new decree to be heard in every city, in every foreign capital, and in every hall of power, from day: a new vision will govern land, from day,'s going to be America. America.

Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs will be made to benefit American workers and American families. must protect borders from the ravages of countries making products, stealing companies and destroying jobs. Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength. will fight for with every breath in body, and will never, ever let down. America will start winning, winning like never before. will bring jobs. will bring borders. will bring wealth, and will bring dreams. will build new roads and highways and bridges and airports and tunnels, and railways, across wonderful nation. will get people of welfare and to work, rebuilding country with American hands and American labor.

 will follow two simple rules: buy American, and hire American. will seek friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world, but do so with the understanding is the of nations to put own interests. do not seek to impose way of life on, but rather to let shine as an example. will shine for to follow. will reinforce old alliances and form new ones, and unite the civilized world against radical Islamic terrorism, will eradicate from the face of the Earth.

At the bedrock of politics will be a total allegiance to the United States of America, and through loyalty to country, will rediscover loyalty to. When open heart to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice. The Bible tells, how good and pleasant is when God's people live in unity. must speak minds, debate disagreements, but always pursue solidarity. When America is united, America is unstoppable. There should be no fear. are protected, and will always be protected. will be protected by the great men and women of military and law enforcement. And, will be protected by God.

, must think big and dream even bigger. In America, understand a nation is living as long as is striving. will no longer accept politicians are talk and no action, complaining but never doing. The time for empty talk is over. arrives the hour of action. Do not allow to tell cannot be done. No challenge can match the heart and fight and spirit of America. will not fail. country will thrive and prosper.

 stand at the birth of a new millennium, ready to unlock the mysteries of space, to free the Earth from the miseries of disease and to harness the industries and technologies of tomorrow. A new national pride will stir souls, lift sights and heal divisions.'s time to remember old wisdom soldiers will never forget, whether are black, or brown, or white, bleed the same blood of patriots. enjoy the same glorious freedoms, and salute the same, great American flag. And whether a child is born in the urban sprawl of Detroit or the windswept plains of Nebraska, look up at the at the same night sky, fill heart with the same dreams and are infused with the breath of life by the same almighty creator.

So to Americans, in every city near and far, small and large, from mountain to mountain, from ocean to ocean, hear words. will never be ignored. voice, hopes, and dreams will define American destiny. And courage and goodness and love, will forever guide along the way., will make America strong. will make America wealthy. will make America proud will make America safe, And yes,, will make will make America great. Thank. God bless. And god bless America. Thank. God bless America.